Create rule S6962 (#3847)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6962/csharp/rule.adoc

- Under heavy load, there's the risk of https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/fundamentals/networking/http/httpclient-guidelines#pooled-connections[running out of available sockets], leading to https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.sockets.socketexception[SocketException] errors. This is because each HttpClient instance uses a separate network connection, and there's a limit to the number of connections that can be opened simultaneously. Note that even after you dispose of an HttpClient https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/architecture/microservices/implement-resilient-applications/use-httpclientfactory-to-implement-resilient-http-requests#issues-with-the-original-httpclient-class-available-in-net[sockets are not being immediately freed up].
- Each HttpClient has its own set of resources (like headers, base address, timeout, etc.) that need to be managed. Creating a new HttpClient for every request means these resources are not being reused, leading to resource waste.
- You introduce a significant performance overhead when creating a new HttpClient for every HTTP request.

> - HttpClient, by default, doesn't respect the Time To Live (TTL) settings of the DNS. This means that if the IP address associated with a domain name changes, HttpClient might still use the old, cached IP address, leading to failed requests.

Reviewer: This is not a problem when you create an HTTPClient every time. It becomes a problem when you solve the problems introduced by creating an new instance by caching a client as singleton. This should go in the "How to fix" section as an alternative: 

You can alternatively cache the HttpClient in a singleton or a static field, but you need to be aware of ...

- You introduce a significant performance overhead when creating a new HttpClient for every HTTP request.

== How to fix it

The https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.http.ihttpclientfactory[`IHttpClientFactory`] was introduced in ASP.NET Core 2.1 to solve these problems. It handles pooling HTTP connections to optimize performance and reliability.

There are https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/fundamentals/http-requests#consumption-patterns[several ways] that you can use IHttpClientFactory in your application:

- https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/httpclient-factory#basic-usage[Basic usage]
- https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/httpclient-factory#named-clients[Named Clients]
- https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/httpclient-factory#typed-clients[Typed Clients]
- https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/httpclient-factory#generated-clients[Generated Clients]

> Alternatively, you may cache the HttpClient in a singleton or a static field. You should be aware that by default, the HttpClient doesn't respect the DNS's Time To Live (TTL) settings. If the IP address associated with a domain name changes, HttpClient might still use the old, cached IP address, leading to failed requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you may cache the HttpClient in a singleton or a static field. You should be aware that by default, the HttpClient doesn't respect the DNS's Time To Live (TTL) settings. If the IP address associated with a domain name changes, HttpClient https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/architecture/microservices/implement-resilient-applications/use-httpclientfactory-to-implement-resilient-http-requests#issues-with-the-original-httpclient-class-available-in-net[might still use the old], cached IP address, leading to failed requests.
```

> In case you decide to cache the HttpClient in a singleton or a static field, you should be aware that by default the HttpClient doesn't respect the Time To Live (TTL) settings of the DNS. This means that if the IP address associated with a domain name changes, HttpClient might still use the old, cached IP address, leading to failed requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you may cache the HttpClient in a singleton or a static field. You should be aware that by default, the HttpClient doesn't respect the DNS's Time To Live (TTL) settings. If the IP address associated with a domain name changes, HttpClient might still use the old, cached IP address, leading to failed requests.
```

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
[ApiController]
[Route("controller")]
public class FooController : Controller
{
    [HttpGet]
    public async Task<string> Foo()
    {
        using var client = new HttpClient();  //Noncompliant
        return await client.GetStringAsync(_url);
    }
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
// File: Startup.cs
public class Startup
{
    public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
    {
        services.AddHttpClient();
        // ...
    }
}

[ApiController]
[Route("controller")]
public class FooController : Controller
{
    private readonly IHttpClientFactory _clientFactory;

    public FooController(IHttpClientFactory clientFactory)
    {
        _clientFactory = clientFactory;
    }

    [HttpGet]
    public async Task<string> Foo()
    {

>         using var client = _clientFactory.CreateClient(); // Compliant

Reviewer: or "(Basic HttpClientFactory usage")
```suggestion
        using var client = _clientFactory.CreateClient(); // Compliant (Basic usage)
```

> In frequently used code paths, such as controller actions, you should avoid using the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.http.httpclient[HttpClient] directly and opt for the https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.http.ihttpclientfactory[HttpClientFactory] instead. This way, you avoid wasting resources and creating performance overhead.

Reviewer: I think it is better to link to https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/httpclient-factory The article describes, HttpClientFactory, named clients, typed clients and generated clients. It also describes some more benefits. I would rename the sentence.

> and opt for https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/httpclient-factory[one of the IHttpClientFactory based mechanisms] instead.

== Why is this an issue?

If a code path that creates and disposes of HttpClient objects is frequently used then, the following issues can occur: 

- Under heavy load, there's the risk of https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/fundamentals/networking/http/httpclient-guidelines#pooled-connections[running out of available sockets], leading to https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.sockets.socketexception[SocketException] errors. This is because each HttpClient instance uses a separate network connection, and there's a limit to the number of connections that can be opened simultaneously.

- Each HttpClient has its own set of resources (like headers, base address, timeout, etc.) that need to be managed. Creating a new HttpClient for every request means these resources are not being reused, leading to resource waste.

- You introduce a significant performance overhead when creating a new HttpClient for every HTTP request.

> 

Reviewer 2: > and the DNS cache problem with static HttpClients should also be mentioned.

In this case also, HttpClient instantiations at the class level might have the same issue, right?

> 

Reviewer 2: > There you should describe the different HttpClientFactory-based methods (IHttpClientFactory, named clients, typed clients, Retrofit)

I added references to the different ways of using the factory - but explaining them again might be a bit of an overkill since MS has pretty good documentation on them already.

> 

Reviewer: > In this case also, HttpClient instantiations at the class level might have the same issue, right?

No. The lifetime of a controller is a request and so it is short-lived.

== How to fix it

> The https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.http.ihttpclientfactory[`IHttpClientFactory`] was introduced in ASP.NET Core 2.1 to solve these problems. It handles pooling HTTP connections to optimize performance and reliability. It is additionally thread-safe.

Reviewer 2: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/fundamentals/http-requests?view=aspnetcore-8.0#use-polly-based-handlers

My mistake - it's about Polly not the library in general.

=== Exceptions

> The rule ignores actions that use cookies.

Reviewer 2: Is this feasible to detect?
I saw that we had a rule (it's deleted) that was detecting something related to cookies (https://sonarsource.github.io/rspec/#/rspec/S2255/csharp)

Reviewer: This is impossible to detect. The Cookie here is not from the request that executed the action. The Cookie we are talking about here is the cookie set by the server the HttpClient contacts. This is the difference:

1. WebBrowser -> ActionMethod <- Response can set a cookie in the browser. On the next request the browser sends the cookie along with the request
2. HttpClient -> SomeWebserver <- Returns a cookie. The HttpClient caches the Cookies and sends it with the next request to SomeWebserver.

We can only detect 1) to some extent (e.g. the action reads `Request.Cookies["MyCookie"]` or writes `Response.Cookies["MyCookie"] = "SomeValue"`). We can not do the same for HttpClient because here the HTTP client does the cookie handling behind the scene without any developer interaction.

Reviewer 2: I guess we'll wait for feedback after the rule's implementation to understand the potential FP reach?

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----

[ApiController]
[Route("controller")]
public class FooController : Controller
{

> 	[HttpGet]

Reviewer 2: I don't get this - they look the same.
![image](https://github.com/SonarSource/rspec/assets/89914005/d8bf2023-2068-4ec4-9dfb-8e48192ad355)

> 	[HttpGet]

Reviewer: That was a tabs/spaces problem

    public async Task<string> Foo()
    {
        using (var client = new HttpClient())  //Noncompliant
        {
            return await client.GetStringAsync(_url);
        }
    }
}

----

==== Compliant solution

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
// File: Startup.cs
public class Startup
{
    public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
    {
        services.AddHttpClient();
        // ...
    }
}

[ApiController]
[Route("controller")]
public class FooController : Controller
{
    private readonly IHttpClientFactory _clientFactory;

> 	public FooController(IHttpClientFactory clientFactory)

Reviewer: Formatting

Reviewer 2: I don't understand :/

Reviewer: There is a tabs vs spaces issue. The whole constructor is aligned and spaced wrong.
https://github.com/SonarSource/rspec/blob/60b6269de98b01122685eb9ed65e2dec6bb45891/rules/S6962/csharp/rule.adoc

	{
		_clientFactory = clientFactory;
	}

    [HttpGet]
    public async Task<string> Foo()
    {

>         var client = _clientFactory.CreateClient(); // Compliant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        using var client = _clientFactory.CreateClient(); // Compliant
```

        return await client.GetStringAsync(_url);
    }
}

----

== Resources

=== Documentation

* https://rules.sonarsource.com/csharp/RSPEC-6420/[S6420 - Client instances should not be recreated on each Azure Function invocation]
* Microsoft Learn - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.http.ihttpclientfactory[IHttpClientFactory Interface]
* Microsoft Learn - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.http.httpclient[HttpClient Class]
* Microsoft Learn - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/httpclient-factory[IHttpClientFactory with .NET]

> * Microsoft Learn - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/architecture/microservices/implement-resilient-applications/use-httpclientfactory-to-implement-resilient-http-requests#multiple-ways-to-use-ihttpclientfactory[Use IHttpClientFactory to implement resilient HTTP requests]

Reviewer: The whole article applies
```suggestion
* Microsoft Learn - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/architecture/microservices/implement-resilient-applications/use-httpclientfactory-to-implement-resilient-http-requests[Use IHttpClientFactory to implement resilient HTTP requests]
```
